---
path: '/part-18/6-data-arrays'
title: 'Data Arrays'
hidden: false
---

Another type that works kind of like a list but is more efficient for some operations is the array. Arrays are familiar from many other programming languages, but Haskell arrays are a bit different.

Unlike the `Data.Map` module, the `Data.Array` can just be imported normally:
```haskell
import Data.Array
```
Now we can look at the type of the `array` function that constructs an array.

```haskell
array :: Ix i => (i, i) -> [(i, e)] -> Array i e
```

There are a couple of things to notice here. First of all, the `Array` type is parameterized by _two_ types: the index type and the element type. Most other programming languages only parameterize arrays with the element type, but the index type is always `int`. In Haskell, we can have, for example, an `Array Char Int`: an array indexed by characters, or `Array Bool String`, an array indexed by booleans, or even `Array (Int,Int) Int`, a two-dimensional array of ints.

Not all types can be index types. Only types that are similar to integers are suitable. That is the reason for the `Ix i` class constraint. The `Ix` class collects all the types that can be used as array indices.

Secondly, the `array` function takes an extra `(i,i)` parameter. These are the minimum and maximum indices of the array. Unlike some other languages, where arrays always start at index 0 or 1, in Haskell you can define an array that starts from 7 and goes to 11. So here’s that array:

```haskell
myArray :: Array Int String
myArray = array (7,11) [(7,"seven"), (8,"eight"), (9,"nine"), (10,"ten"), (11,"ELEVEN")]
```

Listing all the indices and elements in order can be a bit cumbersome, so there’s also the `listArray` constructor that just takes a list of elements in order:

```haskell
listArray :: Ix i => (i, i) -> [e] -> Array i e

myArray :: Array Int String
myArray = listArray (7,11) ["seven", "eight", "nine", "ten", "ELEVEN"]
```

Arrays are used with two new operators:

```haskell
-- Array lookup
(!) :: Ix i => Array i e -> i -> e
-- Array update
(//) :: Ix i => Array i e -> [(i, e)] -> Array i e
```

Here’s an example `GHCi` session:

```haskell
Prelude> import Data.Array
Prelude Data.Array> myArray = listArray (7,11) ["seven", "eight", "nine", "ten", "ELEVEN"]
Prelude Data.Array> myArray
array (7,11) [(7,"seven"),(8,"eight"),(9,"nine"),(10,"ten"),(11,"ELEVEN")]
Prelude Data.Array> myArray ! 8
"eight"
Prelude Data.Array> myArray // [(8,"ocho"),(9,"nueve")]
array (7,11) [(7,"seven"),(8,"ocho"),(9,"nueve"),(10,"ten"),(11,"ELEVEN")]
```

You might be wondering why the `(//)` operator does multiple updates at once. The reason is the main weakness of Haskell arrays: immutability. Since arrays can’t be changed in place, `(//)` must copy the whole array. This is why in Haskell it’s often preferable to use lists or maps to store data that needs to be updated. However, arrays may still be useful when constructed once and then used for a large number of lookups. We’ll get back to how Haskell data structures work in the next lecture.

**Note!** In this course we’ll use only `Array`, a simple array type that’s specified in the Haskell standard. There are many other array types like the mutable `IOArray` and the somewhat obscure `DiffArray`. There are also type classes for arrays like `IArray` and `MArray`. In addition to arrays there is a [wide family of `Vector` types](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/vector) that can be more practical than `Array` for real programs.

### Sidenote: Folding over Maps & Arrays

The `Map` and `Array` type are instances of `Foldable` just like lists are! This means you can use functions like `length` and `foldr` on them:

```haskell
length (array (7,11) [(7,"seven"),(8,"eight"),(9,"nine"),(10,"ten"),(11,"ELEVEN")])
    ==> 5
foldr (+) 0 (Map.fromList [("banana",3),("egg",7)])
    ==> 10
```
