---
path: '/part-15/3-letsstart'
title: 'Let’s Start'
hidden: false
---

<text-box variant='learningObjectives' name="Learning objectives">

After this section

- You know how to open GHCI
- You have tested some basic commands
</text-box>


Let’s Start!
----------------

GHCi is the interactive Haskell interpreter. Here’s an example session:
```Haskell
$ stack ghci
GHCi, version 9.2.8: https://www.haskell.org/ghc/  :? for help
Prelude> 1+1
2
Prelude> "asdf"
"asdf"
Prelude> reverse "asdf"
"fdsa"
Prelude> :type "asdf"
"asdf" :: [Char]
Prelude> tail "asdf"
"sdf"
Prelude> :type tail "asdf"
tail "asdf" :: [Char]
Prelude> :type tail
tail :: [a] -> [a]
Prelude> :quit
Leaving GHCi.
```

By the way, the first time you run `stack ghci` it will download GHC and some libraries, so don’t worry if you see some output and have to wait for a while before getting the `Prelude>` prompt.

Let’s walk through this. Don’t worry if you don’t understand things yet, this is just a first brush with expressions and types.

```Haskell
Prelude> 1+1
2
```
The `Prelude>` is the GHCi prompt. It indicates we can use the functions from the Haskell base library called Prelude. We evaluate 1 plus 1, and the result is 2.

```Haskell
Prelude> "asdf"
"asdf"
```

Here we evaluate a string literal, and the result is the same string.

```Haskell
Prelude> reverse "asdf"
"fdsa"
```

Here we compute the reverse of a string by applying the function `reverse` to the value `"asdf"`.

```Haskell
Prelude> :type "asdf"
"asdf" :: [Char]
```

In addition to evaluating expressions we can also ask for their type with the `:type` (abbreviated `:t`) GHCi command. The type of `"asdf"` is a list of characters. Commands that start with `:` are part of the user interface of GHCi, not part of the Haskell language.

```Haskell
Prelude> tail "asdf"
"sdf"
Prelude> :t tail "asdf"
tail "asdf" :: [Char]
```

The `tail` function works on lists and returns all except the first element of the list. Here we see `tail` applied to `"asdf"`. We also check the type of the expression, and it is a list of characters, as expected.

```Haskell
Prelude> :t tail
tail :: [a] -> [a]
```

Finally, here’s the type of the `tail` function. It takes a list of any type as an argument, and returns a list of the same type.

```Haskell
Prelude> :quit
Leaving GHCi.
```

That’s how you quit GHCi.


